let's start down in the dirt here before
we work our way up the Beanstalk that
matters a greater profundity got a
question and I've already posted this on
Twitter somebody wrote in to ask me you
will have been asked questions like this
yourself also if you've been thinking
for any length of time quote what
difference does it make
whether you buy or avoid a non vegan
bread from the supermarket if you don't
buy the bread someone else will buy it
and if not it will end up as waste it
will go into the garbage correct me if
I'm wrong but I think supermarket
managers don't decide to lower the
amount of bread they get based on a
single loaf of bread you didn't buy so
his point is what's the point what use
is it what's the outcome what is the
meaning of refusing to buy a non-vegan
loaf of bread and insisting on only
buying vegan bread and of course by
implication what's the point of being
vegan what's the point of maintaining a
vegan diet um before I read the answer
that I sent to this guy in text form let
me just say rhetoric gets a bad name
sophistry sounds even worse a problem
like this is in part just a problem of
rhetoric how are we going to express
ourselves clearly how we're gonna
prepare ourselves mentally in discussing
this sort of problem which is going to
come up the question is not illegitimate
it's a question we as vegans should be
able to answer can you and this guy Gary
France aione definitely one of the most
influential vegan thinkers and political
leaders the last hundred years Gary
France I own a also put a lot of
emphasis on this word approach he
summarizes his contribution to the
history of veganism as the abolitionist
approach well what we're avoiding there
is a more odious term like ideology
we're a hit or belief system but the
word approach is indeed interesting and
somewhat useful I think how do we
approach these issues
your approach to the issue unlike your
ad ology might not exclude other
approaches you might be able to say to
other vegans we'll look that may be how
you answer this question but here's how
I answer it here's my approach but not
necessarily a difference in the factual
underpinnings of our a cancer a
difference in a rhetoric in part but
obviously the approach it's gonna have
implications gonna have knock-on effects
for how we think and feel how we live
the rest of our lives so a little bit
more than just rhetoric but a little bit
less than etiology a difference of
approach I think it's fair to say at
this point I have my own practice
approach to answering this kind of
question so I wrote back if you've been
a longtime viewer this channel this
won't surprise you I wrote back to this
person quote you do the right thing
because it's the right thing to do and
because this is the kind of person you
want to be or this is the kind of person
you want to become and for no other
reason than that if there's a line of
cocaine on a nightclub table I'm not
going to inhale it and I'm not going to
regret that it may go to waste in
quotation marks go to waste
let it go into the garbage it belongs in
the garbage it is garbage same with meat
same with milk same with eggs quote what
difference does it make you ask the
difference is you the difference is what
kind of person you want to be I want to
be the kind of person who never uses
cocaine not even if it's free of charge
not even if it goes into the garbage can
period end of my reply I'll leave it
unstated obviously the point is I want
to be the kind of person who never eats
meat or who never eats dairy products
even if I can in some sense get away
with it even if it's otherwise free of
charge it's been given to me for free
even if this is the situation is the
particular circumstances if I don't eat
it somebody else will eat it or if I
don't eat it
somebody else will put it into a garbage
can and it will
unquote go to waste right so that's an
approach there's nothing in particular
here I believe or propounding that makes
me different from other vegans but it is
very very different if you approach
veganism by telling people rabbits are
cute bunnies are cute newly hatched baby
chicks are cute baby chickens how can
you possibly tolerate the fact that we
live in a world where these cute rabbits
or tortured in laboratory experiments or
where these cute baby chicks are killed
and ground up in factories factories
that mass-produce eggs these terrible
things that approach millions of people
are using that approach I can't I can't
say it's broken I can't say in an
absolute sense it doesn't work but of
course I can point out and I have done
on this channel in over 1,000 videos I
can point out the advantages and
disadvantages and you know if that's
your approach is hey cute bunnies cute
chickens try to do the right thing your
people
well what about animals that are not so
cute you know how do you answer a
question about cockroaches and indeed
it's it's still a valid question how
would you answer this person's question
what is the sense what is the meaning in
refusing to buy non vegan bread bread
that has some kind of trace amount of
non vegan ingredient now why do I make
this video now I got a question a series
of questions from Augusto so I'm just
using his first name I assume is his
real name Augusto I think has been
watching and supporting the channel for
years mmm sorry if it's only one year or
something it feels like a long time I
remember you you go way back supporting
me on patreon and Washington Channel he
wrote to me on patreon supporting the
channel thanks to everyone he does sends
him one dollar a month to support the
creation of new content and it was
striking to me that Augusto still
doesn't know this fundamental aspect of
my approach and again I'm not gonna get
into it such depth or length here but I
can also recognize my own upper
it has disadvantages as well as
advantages it's an approach not ideology
Augusto wrote hey there ISIL so I know
you make the argument that if palm oil
wasn't grown where it is in the
particular forests particular patch of
land particularly farmland if it's not
grown where it is some other crop would
be farmed there instead however there is
still this importance in terms of
diverse diversity biodiversity and the
survival of the orangutans so how do you
think it's okay to buy products with
palm oil given that you don't believe
it's okay to buy vegan processing so
look this question reasonable question
but it's not elicited it's not there's
no obvious reason for this to come up
when your approach to veganism is what
I've just set out my approach to
veganism is do it because it's the right
thing to do ultimate product is not a
bag of bread on the Shelf it's not a
patch of forest Indonesia the ultimate
product is you this is about what kind
of person you want to be this is
aspirational this is about outcomes and
consequences you can control consequence
being what kind of person you are so
it's reasonably asked me this but this
is something outside of and someone's
challenging approach anyway I don't
accept this idea I don't accept the idea
that you're gonna save the lives of
orangutans by refusing to buy palm oil
it'll see whole series of videos on that
the most recent one vegan gains
responded to a lot of people watcher
responded to it and was a new
perspective for many people on that
issue now with all that haven't set
aside the other thing I've had to live
with all my life is walking the
tightrope between what's abstract and
what's real and as I've said in recent
videos an abstraction necessarily has
less information than something concrete
and it's very easy for people to kind of
fetishize and glorify abstract and
philosophical knowledge as if it's
something more
something greater than real in
particular experience real facts
empirical reality in the real world and
it's not it's something less so people
can very easily get ideologically
attached to the idea that refusing to
buy palm oil actually saves the lives of
orangutans now likewise I don't think
any vegans should be attached the idea
that just refusing to buy beef saves the
lives of cows these things are pretty
parallel so this is what I wrote back to
him I said look in response to my recent
video dealing with palm oil on my hands
I got one message just one from somebody
actually working in those forests he
said the same thing I said but even more
harshly this consumer boycott is
complete [ __ ] if you want to help
orangutans you have to actually help
orangutans they're dying either you go
there and start tranquilizing trapping
and relocating them or else they die and
the death and destruction is very much
ongoing right now I'm asking you to move
past the question of is it okay to buy
this thing in a supermarket beyond the
vague categories of ecology and habitat
conservation that we're talking about
and to contrast it to direct
interventions there's pause if you get a
ladder and climb up a tree and rescue a
cat from a tree you're saving the life
of a cat right if you fly to Indonesia
and you actually go to where the force
are being cut down and you save the life
of an orangutan you provide it with
habitat somewhere or you even relocate
it to a zoo if that's the best you can
do you save the life of anything nothing
else is actually saving the life of an
orangutan nothing else is actually
saving the life of a kitten that's
something real and the sort of
justification people engage in for these
[Music]
boycotts consumer boycotts
shopping mall activism really
slacktivism I think it's misleading and
really slightly crazy to try to drape
them in the flag of directly saving the
lives of animals I think it's misleading
I think it's false but hey it's a
different approach
I do not approach the ISM that way but
ultimately you know veganism is a praxis
in search of a philosophy it's not a
philosophy that produces the practice so
different people can come up with
different philosophies to justify and
propound what it is they're doing as
vegans that's okay we got philosophical
diversity and without unity on matters
of praxis principled ethics ecology so
on and so forth that's okay that's a
pretty strong position for for veganism
to be in so I continue saying buying a
product with a pom well free label does
nothing to help the orangutan if you buy
a bottle of oil that says kitten free it
doesn't do anything to save the life of
a kitten up a tree doesn't it also
doesn't do anything to harm the kitten
but it doesn't so keep it straight it's
this difference between something and
nothing the University that employed me
in Cambodia had all of its doors and
wooden furniture made of Indonesian wood
those doors made of wood could have
killed more orangutans than a thousand
bottles of palm oil even so will it make
a difference if I now in Cambodia
refused to open the door
I was literally true by the way I saw
the doors being installed and they all
had stickers and I'm saying product of
Indonesia so goes to roll back and he
said he's a fan of the channel but he
didn't mince his words he said I will
say that's a bit hippie it's a bit
hypocritical of you it's a bit
hypocritical of you to say that it
doesn't matter if it's palm oil free
being that you insist on everything you
eat and by being vegan yet here you say
it doesn't have an impact well how come
you're so adamant about things being
vegan because of course they have an
impact I would argue that refusing to
consume things with palm oil has an
impact as well and perilous
so you see now we're several steps down
the road if I had started out with that
approach the first question from another
viewer that was asked and that I
answered if I had answered that person
by saying oh yes yes yes you must
piously believe that every loaf of bread
you buy invisibly and indirectly
has this kind of positive outcome saving
the lives of animals then now I'd be
trapped with that implication but I
didn't I rejected that premise at step
one and I'm still rejecting it here at
step 10 that's not part of my approach
and that doesn't mean it's bad and evil
and wrong of other people do it other
people some people just base their
veganism on the fact that they had a pet
dog as a kid and they think dogs are
cute and they don't want to hurt pigs
and cows for the same reason they don't
wonder dogs works for them I mean I
don't think it's really philosophically
or politically sophisticated but works
for them so there's more than one
approach to this kind of thing so I
wrote back and just reiterated look I've
made many videos explaining this maybe
you've seen some of them maybe you
haven't
it isn't hypocritical for me to say this
at all because there are different
criteria for the two statements that
you're contrasting if you believe that
refusing to eat meat and dairy being
vegan is a necessary precondition for
lobbying for ethical and ecological
change that is true there are two
completely different statements the
premise of the two claims is completely
different so the contrast is between the
premise that refusing to eat palm oil
will save the lives of orangutans again
to me this is ridiculous as if I tell
you buying this container of soy milk
will save the life of a kitten that's up
a tree
it doesn't buying the soy milk doesn't
save the life of a cow it doesn't save
the life of kittens of a tree it's the
right thing to do buy soy milk instead
of cow's milk don't get me wrong but if
you want to save the lives of kittens
you've got to get out there and climb
the tree yourself if you want to save
the lives of orangutans you or your
humanitarian agency actually has to
intervene as to do that a label or
product at the supermarket
never have those Oh comes so this is the
one premise is consumer boycott saving
animal lives and the second premise
which is my premise implicitly
explicitly is simply that being vegan
refusing to eat dairy is a necessary
precondition for the ethical and
ecological position you want to be in in
pressing for political change and also
cultural change right if you are trying
to abolish slavery can you continue
owning slaves could you employ slaves in
the evolution of slavery that alone is a
necessary precondition for taking the
next steps in veganism that already is a
sufficient reason to be vegan and
already in this video point of view the
other fundamental reason that I think I
come to next just in the next two senses
zero of my reply okay um I think you'd
be a hypocrite if you tried to be an
ecological leader for example an
activist in the green party while eating
meat most vegans feel the same way that
I do
nevertheless I notice the leader of the
Green Party of Canada eats meat and
supports the beef and dairy industry um
I also think you'd be a bad person if
you used cocaine while trying to be an
ecological leader even though these
things are totally unrelated keeping all
the way real many of you in the audience
I think you believe that also you don't
want to elect a crack head you don't
want to be part of a political movement
led by crack head even though there's no
direct ethical connection between using
cocaine and whatever whatever the
principles are that the Green Party may
be running for office I'm okay I am a
vegan for political reasons those
reasons are ecological ethical and
health-related but nevertheless it's a
political cause and I'm vegan for
political purposes long story short it's
a political identity likewise I refuse
to use cocaine because I don't want to
be the kind of person who uses cocaine
however if you want to save the lives of
wearing attends or if you want to have
an impact on deforestation policy in
Southeast Asia you have to actually
intervene in either saving the
orangutans government policy
deforestation have their conservation
national parks etc in Southeast Asia key
rice veganism one solution and then a
whole lot of philosophical debate and
discussion affect how we should convince
other people to get involved join our
movement participate in that solution
it's one praxis with many philosophies
many different philosophies many
different political ideals fighting over
who is going to control the future or
the vegan movement and with all the
humility recognizing its advantages and
disadvantages that in one relatively
short video is my approach